README.md, before:

# [csi-release-tools](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-release-tools)

These build and test rules can be shared between different Go projects
without modifications. Customization for the different projects happen
in the top-level Makefile.

The rules include support for building and pushing Docker images, with
the following features:
 - one or more command and image per project
 - push canary and/or tagged release images
 - automatically derive the image tag(s) from repo tags
 - the source code revision is stored in a "revision" image label
 - never overwrites an existing release image

Usage
-----

The expected repository layout is:
 - `cmd/*/*.go` - source code for each command
 - `cmd/*/Dockerfile` - docker file for each command or
   Dockerfile in the root when only building a single command
 - `Makefile` - includes `release-tools/build.make` and sets
   configuration variables
 - `.travis.yml` - a symlink to `release-tools/.travis.yml`

To create a release, tag a certain revision with a name that
starts with `v`, for example `v1.0.0`, then `make push`
while that commit is checked out.

It does not matter on which branch that revision exists, i.e. it is
possible to create releases directly from master. A release branch can
still be created for maintenance releases later if needed.

Release branches are expected to be named `release-x.y` for releases
`x.y.z`. Building from such a branch creates `x.y-canary`
images. Building from master creates the main `canary` image.

Sharing and updating
--------------------

[`git subtree`](https://github.com/git/git/blob/master/contrib/subtree/git-subtree.txt)
is the recommended way of maintaining a copy of the rules inside the
`release-tools` directory of a project. This way, it is possible to make
changes also locally, test them and then push them back to the shared
repository at a later time.

We no longer care about importing the full commit history, so `--squash` should be used
when submitting a `release-tools` update. Also make sure that the PR for that
contains the automatically generated commit message in the PR description.
It contains the list of individual commits that were squashed. The script from
https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-release-tools/issues/7 can create such
PRs automatically.

Cheat sheet:

- `git subtree add --squash --prefix=release-tools https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-release-tools.git master` - add release tools to a repo which does not have them yet (only once)
- `git subtree pull --squash --prefix=release-tools https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-release-tools.git master` - update local copy to latest upstream (whenever upstream changes)
- edit, `git commit`, `git subtree push --prefix=release-tools git@github.com:<user>/csi-release-tools.git <my-new-or-existing-branch>` - push to a new branch before submitting a PR

verify-shellcheck.sh
--------------------

The [verify-shellcheck.sh](./verify-shellcheck.sh) script in this repo
is a stripped down copy of the [corresponding
script](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.14/hack/verify-shellcheck.sh)
in the Kubernetes repository. It can be used to check for certain
errors shell scripts, like missing quotation marks. The default
`test-shellcheck` target in [build.make](./build.make) only checks the
scripts in this directory. Components can add more directories to
`TEST_SHELLCHECK_DIRS` to check also other scripts.

End-to-end testing
------------------

A repo that wants to opt into testing via Prow must set up a top-level
`.prow.sh`. Typically that will source `prow.sh` and then transfer
control to it:

``` bash
#! /bin/bash -e

. release-tools/prow.sh
main
```

All Kubernetes-CSI repos are expected to switch to Prow. For details
on what is enabled in Prow, see
https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/config/jobs/kubernetes-csi

Test results for periodic jobs are visible in
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-storage-csi-ci

It is possible to reproduce the Prow testing locally on a suitable machine:
- Linux host
- Docker installed
- code to be tested checkout out in `$GOPATH/src/<import path>`
- `cd $GOPATH/src/<import path> && ./.prow.sh`

Beware that the script intentionally doesn't clean up after itself and
modifies the content of `$GOPATH`, in particular the `kubernetes` and
`kind` repositories there. Better run it in an empty, disposable
`$GOPATH`.

When it terminates, the following command can be used to get access to
the Kubernetes cluster that was brought up for testing (assuming that
this step succeeded):

    export KUBECONFIG="$(kind get kubeconfig-path --name="csi-prow")"

It is possible to control the execution via environment variables. See
`prow.sh` for details. Particularly useful is testing against different
Kubernetes releases:

    CSI_PROW_KUBERNETES_VERSION=1.13.3 ./.prow.sh
    CSI_PROW_KUBERNETES_VERSION=latest ./.prow.sh

Dependencies and vendoring
--------------------------

Most projects will (eventually) use `go mod` to manage
dependencies. `dep` is also still supported by `csi-release-tools`,
but not documented here because it's not recommended anymore.

The usual instructions for using [go
modules](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Modules) apply. Here's a cheat sheet
for some of the relevant commands:
- list available updates: `GO111MODULE=on go list -u -m all`
- update or add a single dependency: `GO111MODULE=on go get <package>`
- update all dependencies to their next minor or patch release:
  `GO111MODULE=on go get ./...` (add `-u=patch` to limit to patch
  releases)
- lock onto a specific version: `GO111MODULE=on go get <package>@<version>`
- clean up `go.mod`: `GO111MODULE=on go mod tidy`
- update vendor directory: `GO111MODULE=on go mod vendor`

`GO111MODULE=on` can be left out when using Go >= 1.13 or when the
source is checked out outside of `$GOPATH`.

`go mod tidy` must be used to ensure that the listed dependencies are
really still needed. Changing import statements or a tentative `go
get` can result in stale dependencies.

The `test-vendor` verifies that it was used when run locally or in a
pre-merge CI job. If a `vendor` directory is present, it will also
verify that it's content is up-to-date.

The `vendor` directory is optional. It is still present in projects
because it avoids downloading sources during CI builds. If this is no
longer deemed necessary, then a project can also remove the directory.

Conversion of a repository that uses `dep` to `go mod` can be done with:

    GO111MODULE=on go mod init
    release-tools/go-get-kubernetes.sh <current Kubernetes version from Gopkg.toml>
    GO111MODULE=on go mod tidy
    GO111MODULE=on go mod vendor
    git rm -f Gopkg.toml Gopkg.lock
    git add go.mod go.sum vendor

### Updating Kubernetes dependencies

When using packages that are part of the Kubernetes source code, the
commands above are not enough because the [lack of semantic
versioning](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/72638)
prevents `go mod` from finding newer releases. Importing directly from
`kubernetes/kubernetes` also needs `replace` statements to override
the fake `v0.0.0` versions
(https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/79384). The
`go-get-kubernetes.sh` script can be used to update all packages in
lockstep to a different Kubernetes version. Example usage:
```
$ ./release-tools/go-get-kubernetes.sh 1.16.4
```

Commit message:

Squashed 'release-tools/' changes from 7bc70e526..1748b16b4
1748b16b4 Merge pull request #136 from pohly/go-1.16
ec844ea60 remove travis.yml, Go 1.16
df76aba89 Merge pull request #134 from andyzhangx/add-build-arg
e314a56d0 add build-arg ARCH for building multi-arch images, e.g. ARG ARCH FROM k8s.gcr.io/build-image/debian-base-${ARCH}:v2.1.3

git-subtree-dir: release-tools
git-subtree-split: 1748b16b488381c34a86ddbee110e9ed523bcb20

README.md, after:

# [csi-release-tools](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-release-tools)

These build and test rules can be shared between different Go projects
without modifications. Customization for the different projects happen
in the top-level Makefile.

The rules include support for building and pushing Docker images, with
the following features:
 - one or more command and image per project
 - push canary and/or tagged release images
 - automatically derive the image tag(s) from repo tags
 - the source code revision is stored in a "revision" image label
 - never overwrites an existing release image

Usage
-----

The expected repository layout is:
 - `cmd/*/*.go` - source code for each command
 - `cmd/*/Dockerfile` - docker file for each command or
   Dockerfile in the root when only building a single command
 - `Makefile` - includes `release-tools/build.make` and sets
   configuration variables
 - `.prow.sh` script which imports `release-tools/prow.sh`
   and may contain further customization
 - `.cloudbuild.sh` and `cloudbuild.yaml` as symlinks to
   the corresponding files in `release-tools` or (if necessary)
   as custom files

To create a release, tag a certain revision with a name that
starts with `v`, for example `v1.0.0`, then `make push`
while that commit is checked out.

It does not matter on which branch that revision exists, i.e. it is
possible to create releases directly from master. A release branch can
still be created for maintenance releases later if needed.

Release branches are expected to be named `release-x.y` for releases
`x.y.z`. Building from such a branch creates `x.y-canary`
images. Building from master creates the main `canary` image.

Sharing and updating
--------------------

[`git subtree`](https://github.com/git/git/blob/master/contrib/subtree/git-subtree.txt)
is the recommended way of maintaining a copy of the rules inside the
`release-tools` directory of a project. This way, it is possible to make
changes also locally, test them and then push them back to the shared
repository at a later time.

We no longer care about importing the full commit history, so `--squash` should be used
when submitting a `release-tools` update. Also make sure that the PR for that
contains the automatically generated commit message in the PR description.
It contains the list of individual commits that were squashed. The script from
https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-release-tools/issues/7 can create such
PRs automatically.

Cheat sheet:

- `git subtree add --squash --prefix=release-tools https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-release-tools.git master` - add release tools to a repo which does not have them yet (only once)
- `git subtree pull --squash --prefix=release-tools https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-release-tools.git master` - update local copy to latest upstream (whenever upstream changes)
- edit, `git commit`, `git subtree push --prefix=release-tools git@github.com:<user>/csi-release-tools.git <my-new-or-existing-branch>` - push to a new branch before submitting a PR

verify-shellcheck.sh
--------------------

The [verify-shellcheck.sh](./verify-shellcheck.sh) script in this repo
is a stripped down copy of the [corresponding
script](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.14/hack/verify-shellcheck.sh)
in the Kubernetes repository. It can be used to check for certain
errors shell scripts, like missing quotation marks. The default
`test-shellcheck` target in [build.make](./build.make) only checks the
scripts in this directory. Components can add more directories to
`TEST_SHELLCHECK_DIRS` to check also other scripts.

End-to-end testing
------------------

A repo that wants to opt into testing via Prow must set up a top-level
`.prow.sh`. Typically that will source `prow.sh` and then transfer
control to it:

``` bash
#! /bin/bash -e

. release-tools/prow.sh
main
```

All Kubernetes-CSI repos are expected to switch to Prow. For details
on what is enabled in Prow, see
https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/config/jobs/kubernetes-csi

Test results for periodic jobs are visible in
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-storage-csi-ci

It is possible to reproduce the Prow testing locally on a suitable machine:
- Linux host
- Docker installed
- code to be tested checkout out in `$GOPATH/src/<import path>`
- `cd $GOPATH/src/<import path> && ./.prow.sh`

Beware that the script intentionally doesn't clean up after itself and
modifies the content of `$GOPATH`, in particular the `kubernetes` and
`kind` repositories there. Better run it in an empty, disposable
`$GOPATH`.

When it terminates, the following command can be used to get access to
the Kubernetes cluster that was brought up for testing (assuming that
this step succeeded):

    export KUBECONFIG="$(kind get kubeconfig-path --name="csi-prow")"

It is possible to control the execution via environment variables. See
`prow.sh` for details. Particularly useful is testing against different
Kubernetes releases:

    CSI_PROW_KUBERNETES_VERSION=1.13.3 ./.prow.sh
    CSI_PROW_KUBERNETES_VERSION=latest ./.prow.sh

Dependencies and vendoring
--------------------------

Most projects will (eventually) use `go mod` to manage
dependencies. `dep` is also still supported by `csi-release-tools`,
but not documented here because it's not recommended anymore.

The usual instructions for using [go
modules](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Modules) apply. Here's a cheat sheet
for some of the relevant commands:
- list available updates: `GO111MODULE=on go list -u -m all`
- update or add a single dependency: `GO111MODULE=on go get <package>`
- update all dependencies to their next minor or patch release:
  `GO111MODULE=on go get ./...` (add `-u=patch` to limit to patch
  releases)
- lock onto a specific version: `GO111MODULE=on go get <package>@<version>`
- clean up `go.mod`: `GO111MODULE=on go mod tidy`
- update vendor directory: `GO111MODULE=on go mod vendor`

`GO111MODULE=on` can be left out when using Go >= 1.13 or when the
source is checked out outside of `$GOPATH`.

`go mod tidy` must be used to ensure that the listed dependencies are
really still needed. Changing import statements or a tentative `go
get` can result in stale dependencies.

The `test-vendor` verifies that it was used when run locally or in a
pre-merge CI job. If a `vendor` directory is present, it will also
verify that it's content is up-to-date.

The `vendor` directory is optional. It is still present in projects
because it avoids downloading sources during CI builds. If this is no
longer deemed necessary, then a project can also remove the directory.

Conversion of a repository that uses `dep` to `go mod` can be done with:

    GO111MODULE=on go mod init
    release-tools/go-get-kubernetes.sh <current Kubernetes version from Gopkg.toml>
    GO111MODULE=on go mod tidy
    GO111MODULE=on go mod vendor
    git rm -f Gopkg.toml Gopkg.lock
    git add go.mod go.sum vendor

### Updating Kubernetes dependencies

When using packages that are part of the Kubernetes source code, the
commands above are not enough because the [lack of semantic
versioning](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/72638)
prevents `go mod` from finding newer releases. Importing directly from
`kubernetes/kubernetes` also needs `replace` statements to override
the fake `v0.0.0` versions
(https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/79384). The
`go-get-kubernetes.sh` script can be used to update all packages in
lockstep to a different Kubernetes version. Example usage:
```
$ ./release-tools/go-get-kubernetes.sh 1.16.4
```
